# Day 12: Hill Climbing Algorithm

**[Home](README.md)** - **[Description](#description)** - **Files:** [Solution to day 12](12.pl), [Input for day 12](data/12.txt), [Output for day 12](out/12.txt).

## Solution

As usual we will look for a solution which works for both parts of the problem. Part 1 you can walk from `S` to `E` or likewise from `E` to `S` - for part 2 we are looking effectively the quickest way to get from `E` to ground of type `a`.

We use a queue approach for this solution. This way we try all routes of length `n` before looking at routes of length `n+1`. Additionally we know once we have visited a square with route length `n` we know that if we were to visit again it would be a longer route **so** we note we only have to visit each square once - once it's tagged we can subsequently avoid it.

As with many of these problems - firstly it is reading & parsing the data. In this case the heights, and the location of starts/ends..., then working with the data.

## Parsing input

 * Finding start and end. The start/end of the path are marked by `E` & `S` we search for these - the "x" position is given by the number of symbols to the left of the `E`/`S` and height we keep a track of. Finally we use `map { ord($_) - 95 } split //` to convert the strings into arrays of numbers. We already converted `E`/`S` to `z`/`a`.

```perl
my($h,@g,$x,$y,$X,$Y)=-1;
while(<>) {
  chomp;
  $h++;
  /^(.*)E/ && (($y,$x)=($h,length$1));
  /^(.*)S/ && (($Y,$X)=($h,length$1));
  tr/ES/za/;
  push @g,[ map { ord($_)-95} split // ];
}
```

## Processing data

As we are working backwards we have simple rules - (1) `$x,$y` must be within the grid, (2) when we move to a new square it's height must by no more than 1 less than the current height, (3) we haven't visited the square before.

We seed our journey with the end location, and at each step we either walk 1 left, 1 right, 1 up or 1 down {subject to the conditions above}, and push these back on the queue. At each stage - if we haven't visited the location before we check the condition for part 1 (reaches `$X,$Y`) and for reaching an "a" for the first time. 
```perl
my($w,$n,$t,@q,@s,$l,$v) = ( @{$g[0]}-1, 0, 0, [$x,$y,0] );
$s[$Y][$X]=0;

while(@q) {
  ($x,$y,$l) = @{ shift @q };
  next if $s[$y][$x]++;
  $t ||= $l if 
  1 == ( $v = $g[$y][$x] - 1 ) && ($t||=$l);
  $x == $X && $y == $Y && ($n=$l);
  push @q, ( $x > 0  && $g[$y  ][$x-1] >= $v ) ? [$x-1, $y  , $l+1] : (),
           ( $x < $w && $g[$y  ][$x+1] >= $v ) ? [$x+1, $y  , $l+1] : (),
           ( $y > 0  && $g[$y-1][$x  ] >= $v ) ? [$x  , $y-1, $l+1] : (),
           ( $y < $h && $g[$y+1][$x  ] >= $v ) ? [$x  , $y+1, $l+1] : ();
}

say "$n\n$t";
```

## Description

You try contacting the Elves using your handheld device, but the river you're following must be too low to get a decent signal.

You ask the device for a heightmap of the surrounding area (your puzzle input). The heightmap shows the local area from above broken into a grid; the elevation of each square of the grid is given by a single lowercase letter, where `a` is the lowest elevation, `b` is the next-lowest, and so on up to the highest elevation, `z`.

Also included on the heightmap are marks for your current position (`S`) and the location that should get the best signal (`E`). Your current position (`S`) has elevation `a`, and the location that should get the best signal (`E`) has elevation `z``.

You'd like to reach `E`, but to save energy, you should do it in as few steps as possible. During each step, you can move exactly one square up, down, left, or right. To avoid needing to get out your climbing gear, the elevation of the destination square can be at most one higher than the elevation of your current square; that is, if your current elevation is m, you could step to elevation n, but not to elevation o. (This also means that the elevation of the destination square can be much lower than the elevation of your current square.)

For example:

```
Sabqponm
abcryxxl
accszExk
acctuvwj
abdefghi
```
Here, you start in the top-left corner; your goal is near the middle. You could start by moving down or right, but eventually you'll need to head toward the e at the bottom. From there, you can spiral around to the goal:

```
v..v<<<<
>v.vv<<^
.>vv>E^^
..v>>>^^
..>>>>>^
```

In the above diagram, the symbols indicate whether the path exits each square moving up (`^`), down (`v`), left (`<`), or right (`>`). The location that should get the best signal is still `E`, and `.` marks unvisited squares.

This path reaches the goal in `31` steps, the fewest possible.

What is the fewest steps required to move from your current position to the location that should get the best signal?

Your puzzle answer was `412`.

## Part 2
As you walk up the hill, you suspect that the Elves will want to turn this into a hiking trail. The beginning isn't very scenic, though; perhaps you can find a better starting point.

To maximize exercise while hiking, the trail should start as low as possible: elevation `a`. The goal is still the square marked `E`. However, the trail should still be direct, taking the fewest steps to reach its goal. So, you'll need to find the shortest path from any square at elevation `a` to the square marked `E`.

Again consider the example from above:

```
Sabqponm
abcryxxl
accszExk
acctuvwj
abdefghi
```
Now, there are six choices for starting position (five marked a, plus the square marked S that counts as being at elevation a). If you start at the bottom-left square, you can reach the goal most quickly:

```
...v<<<<
...vv<<^
...v>E^^
.>v>>>^^
>^>>>>>^
```

This path reaches the goal in only `29` steps, the fewest possible.

What is the fewest steps required to move starting from any square with elevation a to the location that should get the best signal?

Your puzzle answer was `402`.
