# Day 13: Distress Signal

**[Home](README.md)** - **[Description](#description)** - **Files:** [Solution to day 13](13.pl), [Input for day 13](data/13.txt), [Output for day 13](out/13.txt).

## Solution

Before we start looking at the final part of each problem we need to work out how to compare
two strings. This involves parsing the two strings, and then comparing the data structures.

We could write a parser - but assuming the strings are "safe" we can use string `eval` to get
the data structure.. If I didn't know the strings were "safe" we would need to write a parser
see [the addendum](#addendum)

Load all the structures into an array:
```perl
my @l = map { /\S/ ? eval( $_ ) : ()  } <$fh>;
```
For **part 1** we compare pairwise the entries and find out if in each pair they are in the right
order.

To do this we right a `compare` function and check to see if the value is greater than `0`. If
is we add the index. As we are using the "position" through the array the array index into
the array will be twice the real index, so we have to remember to divide by 2.
```perl
my $n = 0;
for(my $k=0;$k<@l;) {
  $n += (compare( @l[$k++,$k++] )>0)*$k;
}
say $n/2;
```

For **part 2** - we can use perl's ability to define a custom sort function.

We add the two markers to the start of the list. These will then have index `0` and `1`. We then sort the indexes based on the lists,
then we search through the index list and find the elements which have values `0` and `1` and multiply there indecies together.

```perl
my $t = 1;
unshift @l,[[2]],[[6]];
my @r = sort { compare( @l[$b,$a] ) }     0..$#l;
$r[$_] < 2 && ( $t *= ($_+1) )        for 0..$#l;
```

### `compare`

We need to follow the rules for `compare`.
 * If when comparing two arrays element by element we exhaust one or other of the arrays before we find a difference we return -1 or 1
 * If when comparing an array with a number - we replace the number with an array containing that number or use the rule above.
 * If when comparing a number with a number we return -1 or 1 if the numbers are different.

Tricks
 * inside the `$t` line we use `map` inside the call to `compare` - this is because we apply the same "method" to both parameters and it is cleaner to read this wey.

```perl
sub compare {
  my( $p1, $p2 ) = @_;
  for my $c ( 0 .. @{$p1}-1 ) {
    return -1 if $c >= @{$p2};
    my $t = ref $p1->[$c] || ref $p2->[$c]
          ? compare( map { ref $_->[$c] ? $_->[$c] : [$_->[$c]] } $p1, $p2 )
          : $p2->[$c] <=> $p1->[$c];
    return $t if $t;
  }
  @{$p1} < @{$p2}
}
```

### Addendum

This is a "safe" no `eval` parser for the strings.

It starts by tokenising the string into `[`, `]`, `,` and numbers.

We create an array of active sub-trees.
  * If we get a "`[`" we add a new sub-tree {empty array} to the "current" sub-tree, and add this to the list of active sub-trees
  * If we get a "`]`" we just `pop` off the last sub-tree - so we go up a level.
  * If we get a number we just add it to the current sub-tree.

The resultant tree is the first node 
```perl
sub parse {
  my @i = [];
  $_   eq '[' ?  ( push( @{$i[-1]}, [] ) && push @i,$i[-1][-1] )
  : $_ eq ']' ?  pop @i
  : $_ ne ',' && ( push @{$i[-1]}, $_ ) for $_[0] =~ m{(\[|\]|\d+|,)}g;
  $i[0]
}
```

## Description

You climb the hill and again try contacting the Elves. However, you instead receive a signal you weren't expecting: a distress signal.

Your handheld device must still not be working properly; the packets from the distress signal got decoded out of order. You'll need to re-order the list of received packets (your puzzle input) to decode the message.

Your list consists of pairs of packets; pairs are separated by a blank line. You need to identify how many pairs of packets are in the right order.

For example:

```
[1,1,3,1,1]
[1,1,5,1,1]

[[1],[2,3,4]]
[[1],4]

[9]
[[8,7,6]]

[[4,4],4,4]
[[4,4],4,4,4]

[7,7,7,7]
[7,7,7]

[]
[3]

[[[]]]
[[]]

[1,[2,[3,[4,[5,6,7]]]],8,9]
[1,[2,[3,[4,[5,6,0]]]],8,9]
```

Packet data consists of lists and integers. Each list starts with `[`, ends with `]`, and contains zero or more comma-separated values (either integers or other lists). Each packet is always a list and appears on its own line.

When comparing two values, the first value is called left and the second value is called right. Then:

 * If both values are integers, the lower integer should come first. If the left integer is lower than the right integer, the inputs are in the right order. If the left integer is higher than the right integer, the inputs are not in the right order. Otherwise, the inputs are the same integer; continue checking the next part of the input.
 * If both values are lists, compare the first value of each list, then the second value, and so on. If the left list runs out of items first, the inputs are in the right order. If the right list runs out of items first, the inputs are not in the right order. If the lists are the same length and no comparison makes a decision about the order, continue checking the next part of the input.
 * If exactly one value is an integer, convert the integer to a list which contains that integer as its only value, then retry the comparison. For example, if comparing [0,0,0] and 2, convert the right value to [2] (a list containing 2); the result is then found by instead comparing [0,0,0] and [2].

Using these rules, you can determine which of the pairs in the example are in the right order:

```
== Pair 1 ==
- Compare [1,1,3,1,1] vs [1,1,5,1,1]
  - Compare 1 vs 1
  - Compare 1 vs 1
  - Compare 3 vs 5
    - Left side is smaller, so inputs are in the right order

== Pair 2 ==
- Compare [[1],[2,3,4]] vs [[1],4]
  - Compare [1] vs [1]
    - Compare 1 vs 1
  - Compare [2,3,4] vs 4
    - Mixed types; convert right to [4] and retry comparison
    - Compare [2,3,4] vs [4]
      - Compare 2 vs 4
        - Left side is smaller, so inputs are in the right order

== Pair 3 ==
- Compare [9] vs [[8,7,6]]
  - Compare 9 vs [8,7,6]
    - Mixed types; convert left to [9] and retry comparison
    - Compare [9] vs [8,7,6]
      - Compare 9 vs 8
        - Right side is smaller, so inputs are not in the right order

== Pair 4 ==
- Compare [[4,4],4,4] vs [[4,4],4,4,4]
  - Compare [4,4] vs [4,4]
    - Compare 4 vs 4
    - Compare 4 vs 4
  - Compare 4 vs 4
  - Compare 4 vs 4
  - Left side ran out of items, so inputs are in the right order

== Pair 5 ==
- Compare [7,7,7,7] vs [7,7,7]
  - Compare 7 vs 7
  - Compare 7 vs 7
  - Compare 7 vs 7
  - Right side ran out of items, so inputs are not in the right order

== Pair 6 ==
- Compare [] vs [3]
  - Left side ran out of items, so inputs are in the right order

== Pair 7 ==
- Compare [[[]]] vs [[]]
  - Compare [[]] vs []
    - Right side ran out of items, so inputs are not in the right order

== Pair 8 ==
- Compare [1,[2,[3,[4,[5,6,7]]]],8,9] vs [1,[2,[3,[4,[5,6,0]]]],8,9]
  - Compare 1 vs 1
  - Compare [2,[3,[4,[5,6,7]]]] vs [2,[3,[4,[5,6,0]]]]
    - Compare 2 vs 2
    - Compare [3,[4,[5,6,7]]] vs [3,[4,[5,6,0]]]
      - Compare 3 vs 3
      - Compare [4,[5,6,7]] vs [4,[5,6,0]]
        - Compare 4 vs 4
        - Compare [5,6,7] vs [5,6,0]
          - Compare 5 vs 5
          - Compare 6 vs 6
          - Compare 7 vs 0
            - Right side is smaller, so inputs are not in the right order
```

What are the indices of the pairs that are already in the right order? (The
first pair has index `1`, the second pair has index `2`, and so on.) In the
above example, the pairs in the right order are `1`, `2`, `4`, and `6`; the sum of
these indices is `13`.

Determine which pairs of packets are already in the right order. What is the sum of the indices of those pairs?

Your puzzle answer was `6428`.

## Part 2

Now, you just need to put all of the packets in the right order. Disregard the blank lines in your list of received packets.

The distress signal protocol also requires that you include two additional divider packets:

```
[[2]]
[[6]]
```

Using the same rules as before, organize all packets - the ones in your list of received packets as well as the two divider packets - into the correct order.

For the example above, the result of putting the packets in the correct order is:

```
[]
[[]]
[[[]]]
[1,1,3,1,1]
[1,1,5,1,1]
[[1],[2,3,4]]
[1,[2,[3,[4,[5,6,0]]]],8,9]
[1,[2,[3,[4,[5,6,7]]]],8,9]
[[1],4]
[[2]]
[3]
[[4,4],4,4]
[[4,4],4,4,4]
[[6]]
[7,7,7]
[7,7,7,7]
[[8,7,6]]
[9]
```

Afterward, locate the divider packets. To find the decoder key for this distress signal, you need to determine the
indices of the two divider packets and multiply them together. (The first packet is at index 1, the second packet
is at index 2, and so on.) In this example, the divider packets are `10th` and `14th`, and so the decoder key is `140`.

Organize all of the packets into the correct order. What is the decoder key for the distress signal?

Your puzzle answer was `22464`.
