# Day 14: Regolith Reservoir

**[Home](README.md)** - **[Description](#description)** - **Files:** [Solution to day 14](14.pl), [Input for day 14](data/14.txt), [Output for day 14](out/14.txt).

## Solution

In all these problems we have to parse the input and then process that data. In some cases we can do these a line at a time. And we have our answer at the end of the parsing. In this case we can't we have to parse the input to produce the map - and then we have to process the map.

### Parsing the map:
A line consists of a series of pairs separated by a "` -> `" that defines the way points on a "walk". We have to walk this walk marking each square with a "hash" or "rock".

```perl
my($n,$t,$y,$x,$z,@m)=(0,0);

while(<>) { ## While we have input
  my($s,@p) = map { [split/,/] } split / -> /; ## Split into array of [x,y] pairs, and put
                                               ## first value in "start"
  $m[$s->[1] ][ $s->[0]]='#';                  ## Mark the start square as "seen"
  for(@p) {
    ($x,$y) = ( $_->[0] <=> $s->[0], $_->[1] <=> $s->[1] ); ## Compute direction to walk to
                                                            ## next point.
    $m[ $s->[1]+=$y ][ $s->[0]+=$x ]='#' while $s->[0] != $_->[0] || $s->[1] != $_->[1]
                                               ## Just walk along and mark "#" until
                                               ## we get to the way point.
  }
}
```

### Notes:
For each "walk"
 * A nested map with separators `/ -> /` and `,` returns the data structure of points - perl is a natural choice for this sort of work...
 * We split the points into a "start" point (`$s`) and the remainder of the waypoints (`@p`);
 * We mark the start point, then for each leg of the walk
   * We work out the direction and walk along that path to we meet the waypoint marking the squares on the way

### Dropping the sand:

Now we have produced our map. We need to get on with the calculations:

 * Part 1 we have to stop when sand drips past the last line
 * Part 2 with an "imaginary" base we have to poor until the sand cannot be dropped any more [500,0] is blocked.

To compute part 2 we add too more rows a blank row and a row made entirely of "#"s. To make sure that we have the
right size of last row. We know that sand starts and `(500,0)` and goes down to at most `$#m + 2` rows - so we need
to have a row that is greater than `500 + 2 + $#m`.. wide so we use this as the length of the extra row.

We don't need to compute part1 as a separate calculation we can find this while we are solving part 2. It is
the count of sand when we first go past row `$z = $#m`.

```perl
push @m, [], [ ('#') x (503+($z=$#m)) ];

until($m[$y=0][$x=500]) { ## End condition for loop (and part 2)
  while(1) {
    $n||=$t if (++$y)>$z;   ## End condition for part 1 (first time y > vertical height)
    $m[$y][$x] && ( $m[$y][$x-1] ? $m[$y][$x+1] ? ($m[$y-1][$x]='o',$t++,last) : $x++ : $x-- );
                            ## Ternary hell - 
  }
}
say "$n\n$t"
```

### Notes:
 * We use two nested `while` loops, the outer loop represents each grain of sand. The inner loop it's path through the map.
 * If the square below is not empty...
   * We check to see if the square below & left is not empty
     * If the square below right is fill then we tag the current cell with sand "o" up the counter and jump to the next grain of sand;
     * else we move down and right
   * else we move down and left
 * else we move down.
 * There are two "conditions" to meet
   * **Part 1** - the first time sand passes the end of the original array;
   * **Part 2** - when the cell at `(500,0)` is filled...

## Description

The distress signal leads you to a giant waterfall! Actually, hang on - the signal seems like it's coming from the waterfall itself, and that doesn't make any sense. However, you do notice a little path that leads behind the waterfall.

Correction: the distress signal leads you behind a giant waterfall! There seems to be a large cave system here, and the signal definitely leads further inside.

As you begin to make your way deeper underground, you feel the ground rumble for a moment. Sand begins pouring into the cave! If you don't quickly figure out where the sand is going, you could quickly become trapped!

Fortunately, your familiarity with analyzing the path of falling material will come in handy here. You scan a two-dimensional vertical slice of the cave above you (your puzzle input) and discover that it is mostly air with structures made of rock.

Your scan traces the path of each solid rock structure and reports the x,y coordinates that form the shape of the path, where `x` represents distance to the right and `y` represents distance down. Each path appears as a single line of text in your scan. After the first point of each path, each point indicates the end of a straight horizontal or vertical line to be drawn from the previous point. For example:

```
498,4 -> 498,6 -> 496,6
503,4 -> 502,4 -> 502,9 -> 494,9
```

This scan means that there are two paths of rock; the first path consists of two straight lines, and the second path consists of three straight lines. (Specifically, the first path consists of a line of rock from 498,4 through 498,6 and another line of rock from `498,6` through `496,6`.)

The sand is pouring into the cave from point `500,0`.

Drawing rock as `#`, air as `.`, and the source of the sand as `+`, this becomes:

```
  4     5  5
  9     0  0
  4     0  3
0 ......+...
1 ..........
2 ..........
3 ..........
4 ....#...##
5 ....#...#.
6 ..###...#.
7 ........#.
8 ........#.
9 #########.
```
Sand is produced one unit at a time, and the next unit of sand is not produced until the previous unit of sand comes to rest. A unit of sand is large enough to fill one tile of air in your scan.

A unit of sand always falls down one step if possible. If the tile immediately below is blocked (by rock or sand), the unit of sand attempts to instead move diagonally one step down and to the left. If that tile is blocked, the unit of sand attempts to instead move diagonally one step down and to the right. Sand keeps moving as long as it is able to do so, at each step trying to move down, then down-left, then down-right. If all three possible destinations are blocked, the unit of sand comes to rest and no longer moves, at which point the next unit of sand is created back at the source.

So, drawing sand that has come to rest as `o`, the first unit of sand simply falls straight down and then stops:

```
......+...
..........
..........
..........
....#...##
....#...#.
..###...#.
........#.
......o.#.
#########.
```

The second unit of sand then falls straight down, lands on the first one, and then comes to rest to its left:

```
......+...
..........
..........
..........
....#...##
....#...#.
..###...#.
........#.
.....oo.#.
#########.
```

After a total of five units of sand have come to rest, they form this pattern:

```
......+...
..........
..........
..........
....#...##
....#...#.
..###...#.
......o.#.
....oooo#.
#########.
```
After a total of 22 units of sand:

```
......+...
..........
......o...
.....ooo..
....#ooo##
....#ooo#.
..###ooo#.
....oooo#.
...ooooo#.
#########.
```

Finally, only two more units of sand can possibly come to rest:

```
......+...
..........
......o...
.....ooo..
....#ooo##
...o#ooo#.
..###ooo#.
....oooo#.
.o.ooooo#.
#########.
```

Once all 24 units of sand shown above have come to rest, all further sand flows out the bottom, falling into the endless void. Just for fun, the path any new sand takes before falling forever is shown here with `~`:

```
.......+...
.......~...
......~o...
.....~ooo..
....~#ooo##
...~o#ooo#.
..~###ooo#.
..~..oooo#.
.~o.ooooo#.
~#########.
~..........
~..........
~..........
```

Using your scan, simulate the falling sand. How many units of sand come to rest before sand starts flowing into the abyss below?

Your puzzle answer was `795`.

## Part 2

You realize you misread the scan. There isn't an endless void at the bottom of the scan - there's floor, and you're standing on it!

You don't have time to scan the floor, so assume the floor is an infinite horizontal line with a `y` coordinate equal to two plus the highest `y` coordinate of any point in your scan.

In the example above, the highest `y` coordinate of any point is `9`, and so the floor is at `y=11`. (This is as if your scan contained one extra rock path like `-infinity,11` -> `infinity,11`.) With the added floor, the example above now looks like this:

```
        ...........+........
        ....................
        ....................
        ....................
        .........#...##.....
        .........#...#......
        .......###...#......
        .............#......
        .............#......
        .....#########......
        ....................
<-- etc #################### etc -->
```

To find somewhere safe to stand, you'll need to simulate falling sand until a unit of sand comes to rest at `500,0`, blocking the source entirely and stopping the flow of sand into the cave. In the example above, the situation finally looks like this after `93` units of sand come to rest:

```
............o............
...........ooo...........
..........ooooo..........
.........ooooooo.........
........oo#ooo##o........
.......ooo#ooo#ooo.......
......oo###ooo#oooo......
.....oooo.oooo#ooooo.....
....oooooooooo#oooooo....
...ooo#########ooooooo...
..ooooo.......ooooooooo..
#########################
```

Using your scan, simulate the falling sand until the source of the sand becomes blocked. How many units of sand come to rest?

Your puzzle answer was `30214`.
